# 15.053_softball_optimization
Code for final project in 15.053. Softball batting lineup optimization.

This code was uploaded from another repository (https://github.com/shadekat/15.053_softball_optimization).  My contributions were originally made locally and then uploaded by a teammate. 

This was an open ended group project for my Optimization for Business Analytics class. Softball and baseball are sports that depend on strategically placing players for both offensive positions, in the batting order, and defensive positions, in the field.  Utilizing player statistics appropriately can be the difference between a championship team and a losing team.  Our project tackles the challenge of optimizing a 9-person softball batting order using players’ offensive statistics.  

We used two methods to calculate which batting order was optimal.  For both of these methods, we used a collection of functions that describe the transitions between states for each result of an at-bat. Our first method was computer simulation.  The second method calculated the expected value of the number of runs scored by a specific 9-person batting order.  I mainly focussed on writing the simulations for this project.

The expected value solution had a more desirable result, since there is no variability involved in calculating expected values, but it also took significantly longer to calculate the runs generated by a specific batting order than the simulation solution.  In fact, it would have taken over a year to run the expected value solution on all 10! possible batting orders!  To avoid this, we used the simulation program to reduce the number of possible orders being tested.

Through this project, we discovered a new statistic that could potentially be useful for the MIT Varsity Softball team and other softball or baseball teams. This statistic is the number of runs generated by a single player if that player batted in every spot in the batting order.  This would be a very direct way to evaluate the potential of a player, and also to compare batters.  Although a batting average allows people to see how often a player gets a hit, and although people use the batting average to compare players, it may not be the most intuitive metric.  With the expected number of runs generated by a team composed of only one player, however, we can get a crystal clear measure of the value a single player can add to a team. 

I worked most closely with writing the simulations, preparing the raw data, and creating the testing strategy that led to discovering the statistic that can be used as an alternative t the batting average.  The MIT Varsity Softball Team (I am an outfielder for the team) is planning to use this project and the new statistic to help choose the best batting order for the upcoming 2018 season.
